Contrapuntal composition is the art weaving of independant vocal melodies, in order to create a harmonious whole.  This entails that each melody must serve a dual purpose: first, it must harmonise with the other and secondly, it must be aesthetically pleasing on its own. Due to this dichotomy in the compositional process, contrapuntal composition is generally considered to be a challenging task. To this extent, there have been previous attempts to provide clear rules to compose counterpoints, as are described in the \emph{Gradus ad Parnassum} by J.J. Fux. Though these rules have served well in the instruction of counterpuntal composition, they have never stood on their own as sufficient rules for composition truly admirable pieces of art. 

The purpose of this thesis is to investigate the use of different techniques from Artificial Intelligence for the purpose of composing counterpoint. In particular, a new method for counterpoint generation based on Nested Monte Carlo Search will be proposed and compared to the current state of the art techniques described in the literature. 

THE FOLLOWING SECTIONS WILL BE REMOVED FROM HERE-------------//
Computational Creativity is an area of Artificial Intelligence (AI) which focuses on studying computational processes for the purpose of analysing and creating works of art. One particularly interesting branch of this field is one that is involved with music and the creation thereof, i.e, \emph{Algorithmic Compostion}. 
Research in this area revolves around the use of algorithmic techniques for the creation and/or \emph{imitation} of musical compositions \citebay{fernandez2013ai}. The purpose of this thesis research will be to investigate various Algorithmic Composition techniques in the domain of \emph{Fugal Composition}.

%\section{Background Knowledge}
A Fugue is defined as a piece composed according to a specific compositional technique devised for the purpose of creating complex contrapuntal pieces of music \cite{bruhn1993js}. Here contrapuntal refers to a piece which makes use of \emph{counterpoint}; the juxtaposition of independent melodies for the purpose of creating harmonic content. Fugues are typically based on a single subject that is repeated throughout the different \emph{voices}\footnote{A voice in music can be seen as the source of a specific melody.} in imitation. Fugues are generally complex works of art, that require considerable mental effort on part of the composer. Hofstadter likened the task of improvising a six-part fugue to "playing sixty blind-folded chess games, and winning them all" \citebay{Hofstadter:1979:GEB:539932}. Due to this complexity, it is believed that computers should perform favourably in the task of fugal composition.

J.J Fux's \emph{Gradus ad Parnassum} provides a systematic way of composing fugues and counterpoint \citebay{fux1944study} It is an example of what is called \emph{species counterpoint}, a methodology that is generally used for guiding students in contrapuntal composition. The techniques in the book outline what is effectively an algorithmic way of composing where the problem reduces to applying rules on a starting melody until sufficiently complex counterpoint is generated. Though the techniques described do produce what could be considered \emph{good} fugues, it is stressed that once familiarity with the system is obtained, one should begin to deviate from them. 

%\section{Literature Review}


In general may approaches have from various fields from AI have been applied to the domain of music composition. While the pieces that are made are of quite high quality, they still fall short from anything that an experienced human composer would make. 

One particular approach that has not been particularly investigated in this field is Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS). It is believed that such a method should perform quite well in this domain, particularly when the search space has been formalised. 

In searching the space of fugues efficiently, it is necessary to have a concise representation in order to represent fugues as points within a specific state-space. Such a representation will effectively require a formalisation of important musical concepts. In representing music, there exists a spectrum between direct  or explicit representations and more indirect or implicit representations. An example of a direct representation would be a collection of MIDI information. That is, the pitch, duration, velocity (loudness) and attack time of a particular music event (e.g. a note played on a piano). A slightly more implicit approach would be to only model aspects such as relative pitches between notes, consonance and chord progression. An example of a representation in the more extreme implicit end of the spectrum would be that described by the \emph{Generative Theory of Tonal Music}, a grammatical hierarchical approach to music representation. This representation deals more with the cognitive aspects of music theory and thus is generally more difficult to implement. \citeay{tojo2013computational} describe a method for automatically analysing music according to this theory. It is expected that an approach that lies somewhere in between would be the most appropriate as it is necessary to have a more direct representation in order to simplify the task of searching, but also it would be necessary to encode more information in order to represent more complex relationships inherent in the music. 


Most evaluations have focused on using grading criteria derived from various notes on species counter point. These can take on a range of values or a discrete amount of values. An example could be the number of consonant intervals. Though these methods have generally been successful, it is believed that more information such as the general harmonic structure of the piece should be included to increase the music complexity and aesthetic appeal of the piece. Another possible way to analyse a piece would be to use a heuristic based on some distance measure to other existing pieces. 


Though this is a difficult question to answer, it is hoped that by setting up the correct environment a sufficient analysis of the different methods could be performed. This should reveal which of the methods is better suited for the task of fugue composition. In order to determine which of the methods performs better, a subjective analysis using many reviewers will be performed. This will entail having the users listen to various example of pieces made from the different methods and assigning them a rating based on how much they resemble human composed fugues. 

